On April 29, 2014, Clayton Lockett was executed for the 1999 murder of 19-year-old Stephanie Neiman. After spending over an hour trying to find a suitable vein to insert an IV, officers injected a previously untested combination of drugs into a vein in Lockett’s groin. It became clear that the drugs were not achieving the desired result as Lockett thrashed, struggled to breathe, and spoke even after he was thought to be unconscious. 43 harrowing minutes after the procedure began, Lockett suffered a fatal heart attack.

Lethal injection was suggested in 1888 by a New York doctor named Julius Mount Bleyer. It was meant to be a more humane alternative to hanging, but most states switched instead to the electric chair. It wasn’t until 1977—when an Oklahoma medical examiner named Jay Chapman proposed a three-drug method that would anesthetize and paralyze the condemned before stopping his heart—that lethal injection rose to prominence as the primary method of executions in the United States.

The three-drug procedure, otherwise known as Chapman’s Protocol, would give prisoners an alternative to the electric chair, which could cause immense pain and had on several occasions set inmates on fire. Additionally, a paralyzed prisoner would be easier for witnesses to watch. Oklahoma state legislature approved the proposal that year, and others soon followed. In 1982, Texas became the first state to execute an inmate using lethal injection. Currently, injection is the primary means of execution in all states that practice capital punishment, and the federal government.

SCOTUS has upheld the constitutionality of lethal injection, despite ongoing fears that it constitutes cruel and unusual punishment. In the 2007 case _Bazee v. Rees_, two inmates in Kentucky filed a complaint, arguing that lethal injection could cause unnecessary pain (the standard for cruel and unusual punishment), if the anesthetic were not properly absorbed. This was not an abstract fear; the trial came one year after the botched execution of Brian Steckel, a man who took 12 minutes to die and convulsed long after he was sedated. During the seven-month hearings, there was an unofficial moratorium on lethal injections in all states. In April 2008, The Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of the three-drug cocktail, and the practice resumed.

To comply with Chapman’s protocol, states used sodium thiopental to anesthetize the inmate, pancuronium bromide—also called Pavulon—to paralyze him, and potassium chloride to stop his heart. 

In 2009, Hospira, the sole supplier of sodium thiopental for the prison system, suspended production of the drug because of a shortage of raw ingredients. They planned to resume production in a new Italian factory in 2011, but the Italian government would only allow the export of sodium thiopental if Hospira could ensure it was not used in executions. Fearing potential lawsuits, Hospira announced in 2011 that they would stop manufacturing the drug altogether. The same year, the European Commission banned export of sodium thiopental, along with seven other barbiturates that could be used for capital punishment.

When sodium thiopental supplies ran out or expired, states were forced to look elsewhere. Many began to get their drugs from compounding pharmacies, which manufacture drugs in smaller quantities, often altering ingredients to meet patients’ specific needs. Compounding pharmacies are not subject to the same FDA approval process as large manufacturers, which led to concerns about their safety.

In an effort to protect pharmacies, and themselves, states began penning laws that made the identities of those involved in executions confidential. Marcus Wellons, a death row prisoner, brought a legal complaint against Georgia arguing that using a compounded drug from an undisclosed source constituted cruel and unusual punishment, as it was impossible to know whether the drug had the correct makeup and could be guaranteed to perform as expected.

Georgia’s nondisclosure law also allowed them to keep the identities and qualifications of those performing the execution unknown. Because doctors vow to “do no harm,” they are ethically prohibited from participating in capital punishment, and those who perform duties such as inserting IVs are not necessarily trained for their tasks. The Supreme Court upheld Georgia’s nondisclosure law, and Wellons was executed in June, 2014. Clayton Lockett, together with another inmate, brought a similar complaint against the state of Oklahoma. He, too, demanded information about where the state’s execution drugs came from, and he, too, was denied. 

According to Oklahoma, Clayton Lockett's vein collapsed during his execution and the drugs did not correctly enter his system. Autopsies ordered by Lockett’s attorney and by the state of Oklahoma found that the IV was not inserted properly and compromised the vein, causing the drugs to enter Lockett's tissue rather than his bloodstream.

Lockett’s was not the first or last botched execution of its kind. In July, 2014, Joseph R. Wood III of Arizona spent over an hour and a half gasping on the gurney before he died. According to a study by Amherst College professor Austin Sarat, an estimated 3% of executions have been botched since the beginning of the 20th century. 
