On July 19, 1976, while out of prison on parole, Gary Gilmore [shot and killed two men during separate armed robberies](http://www.clarkprosecutor.org/html/death/US/gilmore001.htm). After a two-day trial in October, he was convicted of murder and sentenced to death in the state of Utah. Although legally entitled, Gilmore refused to appeal the decision. He was 35 when he was convicted and had already spent over half of his life incarcerated in various states. The ACLU fought and won several stays of execution, but Gilmore ultimately told them to “butt out,” stating: “This is my life, and this is my death. It's been sanctioned by the courts that I die, and I accept that.” Given a choice between hanging and firing squad, Gilmore chose to be shot. He was executed on January 17, 1977.

Gary Gilmore’s death marked the end of the ten-year pause in executions in the United States, but the tides had begun to turn decades before. After World War II, human rights became the talk of the western world. In 1948, the United Nations adopted the [Universal Declaration of Human Rights](http://www.un.org/en/documents/udhr/index.shtml). Though this document did not abolish the death penalty, it did specify that “No one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment” and “No one shall be subjected to arbitrary arrest, detention or exile.” Countries across Europe began abolishing the death penalty, either in law or in practice.

In the United States, too, support for capital punishment was waning. In 1957, Hawaii and Alaska outlawed executions; Delaware followed suit the year after, but reinstated the practice in 1961. Between 1964 and 1968, five more states abolished the death penalty. In 1966, support for the capital punishment reached an all time low, with only 42% of the population in favor. Everyone from local politicians to then-presidential candidate Robert Kennedy denounced the practice.

Even while the civil rights movement was demanding equality under the law, sentencing continued to be arbitrary and biased. Two landmark Supreme Court cases in 1968 challenged this. In _United States v. Jackson_, the Court struck down the ruling that defendants could only be sentenced to death by a jury’s decision, since defendants could waive their right to a jury trial in order to avoid execution. In _Witherspoon v. Illinois_, the Court ruled that individuals could not be barred from serving on a jury solely because they had reservations about the death penalty, and could only be excluded if their attitude toward capital punishment would prevent them from making an impartial decision. Although the decisions in _United States_ and _Witherspoon_ did not ban the death penalty, 1968 saw the start of the voluntary moratorium.

In 1972, the moratorium became mandatory. After hearing three cases collectively known as _Furman v. Georgia_, the Supreme Court ruled that the current statutes regarding the administration of capital punishment were unconstitutional. This ruling voided 40 statutes across the country and officially suspended the death penalty.

Over the next four years, states wishing to restore capital punishment made a variety of reforms to their statutes in attempts to reduce arbitrary and discriminatory sentencing. In 1976, the Supreme Court ruled in three cases that Texas’s, Floria’s, and Georgia’s new statutes were constitutional. Thus, the death penalty was reinstated, and with Gary Gilmore’s execution, capital punishment began again.