In 1982, Pedro Medina, a Cuban refugee living in Florida, was convicted of the murder of his next door neighbor, Dorothy James. James was found gagged and stabbed; Medina was found asleep in her car, miles away. Medina was sentenced to death by electrocution.

During the 1997 execution, witnesses testified that they saw flames rising out of Medina’s head and smelled burned flesh. According to police officials, the electric chair, nicknamed “Old Sparky,”1 malfunctioned, but it was later determined that the prison officers had not properly moistened the sponge on the electrode attached to Medina’s head, causing it to burst into flames. The current-carrying sponges require a specific amount of moisture. Too much wetness causes them to short-circuit the system, and too little causes them to become highly resistant and combust.

This was not the first time that Florida had botched an electrocution. The most famous cases are those of Jesse Tafero and Allen Lee Davis, who both sustained slow, painful deaths in Old Sparky. Following Medina's execution, the state’s attorney general, Bob Butterworth, told the press, "People who wish to commit murder, they'd better not do it in the state of Florida because we may have a problem with the electric chair."

Electrocution was first introduced as a means of execution in the late 19th century. It was suggested by a dentist who witnessed a man die after touching part of an electric generator. Electrocution was believed to be a more humane alternative to hanging, which, when improperly performed, caused asphyxiation or decapitation. Electrocution gained popularity in the 20th century and was the primary means of execution until lethal injection was introduced in the 1970s. 