In 2002, Scott Hain became the last juvenile to be executed in the United States.

On an October night in 1987, 17 year old Scott Hain and his 21 year old friend Robert Lambert were hanging out in Tulsa, Oklahoma, drinking and planning what they would steal that night. Their attention shifted when they saw a couple talking in a car nearby. They stole the vehicle and kidnapped its occupants. After driving for a while, they pulled over, at which point Hain robbed the victims at gunpoint and forced them into the trunk of the car. He and Lambert then set the car on fire, killing their hostages.

Hain had a troubled childhood. Both of his parents drank heavily, his father beat him, and while in elementary school he was sexually assaulted by his babysitter. He was held back in school twice, in first and fifth grades. He began to get into trouble in middle school and went to live with a family friend for a year at around age 12, during which time he stayed out of trouble. When he returned to his parents the following year, his criminal acts began. As a teenager, Hain was charged with theft, trespassing, unauthorized use of a vehicle, and grand larceny. By age 15, he was deemed a delinquent and placed in Radar juvenile facility. He went AWOL from the facility three times before moving to Kansas, where his father to sold items Hain stole from the warehouse where he worked. During the three months before the murder, Hain lived on the streets of Tulsa and was a heavy drug user. Though he stole regularly, the murder that landed him on death row was his first violent crime.

In 2005, the Supreme Court ruled that executing juvenile offenders was unconstitutional. By this point 31 states that had the death penalty had laws against executing juvenile offenders. The decision came too late for Hain, who was the 22nd juvenile offender executed since 1976.