In the early morning hours of August 19th, 1989, a group of individuals was hanging out in a Burger King parking lot. One of the men began arguing with a homeless man named Larry Young, harassing him for a beer he held in a paper bag. When Young turned to walk away, he was hit in the head with a pistol. An off-duty police officer named Mark MacPhail, who was moonlighting as a security guard at the Greyhound station next door, came to Young’s aid and was shot twice and killed. The next day, Sylvester “Redd” Coles went to the police and identified Troy Davis as the murderer.

There was little evidence used in the trial. A murder weapon was never recovered, and there was no other physical evidence linking Davis to the shooting. There was nothing but the word of seven witnesses who testified that they had seen Davis shoot MacPhail, and two more who claimed he had confessed to them. Based entirely on these reports, the jury convicted Davis of murder and sentenced him to death.

One of these witnesses was Coles, the man who originally turned Davis in. Coles had been at the scene and admitted to arguing with Young, allegedly before the physical altercation began. He also admitted to owning a .38 caliber gun, the same kind used in the shooting, but claimed he gave it to a friend who lost it.

Despite this evidence against him, Coles was never considered a suspect. Controversial stuff about Coles.

Nineteen years after Davis’s first trial, seven of the eyewitnesses recanted or changed their testimonies. Some admitted that that they had lied; others claimed that they were coerced into making their statements. None of the witnesses knew Davis, but a few knew another man at the scene: Coles. Nine witnesses implicated Coles as the gunman, either stating that they saw him do it or that he later confessed to the crimes. Several witnesses admitted they originally gave false testimony because they were afraid that Coles would retaliate. Others testified that the same person who attacked Young—which Coles was known to have done—killed the officer.

Even without perjuring—intentionally lying during testimony—eyewitness reports are subject to inaccuracies. Memory is malleable; many studies have shown that variables within and beyond the criminal justice system’s control affect what witnesses remember. The procedure for line ups and photo arrays, communication between officers and witnesses, and the lighting when the crime took place, all influence a witness’s ability to correctly identify a suspect. Even the suspect’s race can change the outcome, as witnesses are most likely to mis-identify a suspect is of a different race. 

Despite this, surveys show that eyewitness testimony is highly influential in jury cases. Surveys show that jurors are more likely to believe eyewitnesses who are more confident, though studies show these witnesses are only slightly—if at all—more accurate than those who are less certain. The presence of weapons and witness stress at the crime scene both negatively impact a witness’s ability to accurately identify a perpetrator.

Davis’s case garnered support from Amnesty International and the NAACP. The New York Times followed Davis’ appeals from 2007. [Something about protests, vigils, etc]. The entire nation watched, shocked, as Troy Davis was executed.

Though Davis’s case was more closely watched than many, his is not the only example of sentencing gone wrong. Since DNA evidence was introduced in the 1990s, 73% of death row inmates exonerated were originally convicted based on eyewitness testimony. 