On November 2, 1984, Velma Barfield became the first woman to be executed by lethal injection in United States history. Barfield had been convicted of the first-degree murder of Stuart Taylor, her then fianceé, in December of 1978. There was no question of Barfield's guilt; she confessed to the murder after her sister called North Carolina police and tearfully told them that Barfield had poisoned Taylor and others. Though she was only tried for Taylor's murder, she also confessed to the poisoning of Montgomery and Dollie Edwards, John Henry Lee and her mother, Lillian Burke. 

Following her conviction, Barfield became a born-again Christian and attracted support from the Christian community, including evangelist Billy Graham. Barfield argued that her faith should be considered a mitigating factor in commuting her sentence. Governor James B. Hunt Jr. of North Carolina denied clemency for Barfield in the final days of a closely fought Senate race with Jesse Helms, the Republican incumbent. Though Barfield asked Governor Hunt for clemency, she declined to appeal to the Supreme Court.

300 demonstrators stood a silent vigil outside of North Carolina's Central prison, clustered around a sign that spelled out the word "hope." Each carried a candle that was extinguished at the time of Barfield's execution. Among her last words were an apology for "all the hurt I have caused."

The gender disparity is the greatest inequality on death row. Including Velma Barfield, 14 women have been executed in the United States since 1976—1.02% of the 1,375 executions. According to the NAACP Legal Defense Fund, as of January 1, 2013 there were 63 women on death row, constituting 2.02% of the total death row population. Despite the low sentencing rate for women, murders of female victims are much more likely to result in a death sentence. According to a Cornell Law School study 32.3% of murders involving male victims resulted in a death sentence, while 47.1% of murders with female victims did. The study used data from Delaware between 1976 and 2007. There were certain factors other than gender that may have led to harsher sentencing for murders involving female victims, such as associated sexual crimes and the victim being known to the perpetrator, both of which are more likely with female victims.