On April 22, 1974, two 19-year old United States Air Force airmen, Pierre Dale Selby and William Andrews took five people hostage, tortured them, and ultimately killed three in the Ogden Hi-Fi store. Both men were subsequently found guilty and sentenced to death. 

Selby and Andrews were convicted by an all-white, mostly Mormon jury at a time when the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints did not allow blacks to become priests. During the sentencing hearing, someone passed a note to the jury-box that read "Hang the Niggers." According to Stephen Hawkins, a lawyer for the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, a black prospective juror had been kept off the jury by the prosecutor. Despite the appearance of racial prejudice, the United States Supreme Court refused to hear an appeal in 1988, with Justice Thurgood Marshall dissenting, calling the note passed to the jury "a vulgar incident of lynch-mob racism reminiscent of Reconstruction days." 

Andrews' guilt was never in question; a preponderance of evidence pointed to his involvement in the crimes. At the time of his conviction, however, Utah guidelines did not allow the jury to deliver a sentence of life without parole. Though the law would later change, a Utah court ruled that the law could not be applied retroactively. A death sentence was effectively the default conclusion to a guilty verdict. 

Andrews was not alone. According to a 2003 study by Amnesty International, more than 20% of black defendants who have been executed were convicted by all white juries. Furthermore, though blacks and whites are murder victims in nearly equal numbers, 80% of people executed since 1974 have been executed for murders involving white victims. A comprehensive review of the federal death penalty system in 2000 found that 80% of cases submitted by federal prosecutors for death penalty review in the past five years have involved defendants who are racial minorities.
